Hello everyone. Welcome once again
to WordPress Accessibility Day 2020.
This is a 24 hour long event
where we talk about accessibility.
My name is Ahmed Kabir Chaion
and I'm working as a
Business Development Manager at weDevs.
I'm also a regular contributor
to the making WordPress documentation,
design, polyglots, accessibility,
hosting community, learn WordPress,
and Marketing team.
I will be your host for this session.
You're here for the 10 am UTC talk
with Calum Ryan.
Please feel free to add your question
to the YouTube chat feed
and we'll answer those at the end.
So how do we approach accessibility,
while testing in a way that's sufficiently
comprehensive from a technical perspective,
at the same time presentable to clients
without being technically knowledgeable and
who may themselves have a disability.
So that's a question posed
specifically for this talk.
So in this talk,
the speaker will explain some
of the approaches and attention to detail
it takes to test and present accessibility
issues in websites that's accessible.
The points that will be covered:
using WordPress to help make accessible,
accessibility reports for clients,
the conversations with clients
as part of the accessibility testing process
before and after,
and what the benefits are
of using this approach.
Our speaker Calum is an
Accessibility Consultant for dxw,
helping the public sector
make their websites more accessible.
His background is in frontend
web development and user interface design,
having worked in the web industry
for around 10 years,
which brings to this session accessible—
which brings to this session
making accessibility—
making accessible accessibility reports.
Apologies for that. Calum, take it away.
Thank you.
So I was really pleased to give this talk
about creating accessibility reports,
which are accessible.
And I work for a
company called dxw
who are based in the UK,
in London and Leeds
has around 70 people roughly.
And we design, build, operate,
improve digital public services.
And within dxw, I work in GovPress
which specifically works with WordPress.
We have lots of clients who use WordPress.
They're all public sector mainly.
And throughout the past two months,
I've been working on making
the websites more accessible
and this is for the latest legislation
which is now a legal requirement in the UK
for all public sector websites
to be accessible.
If you take a look at
accessibility.campaign.gov.uk
there's more explanation
on what that involves,
the regulations and who that applies to.
So within organization of GovPress,
I'm the only accessibility expert
and it's been my responsibility
to interpret a lot of that information
from the WCAG guidelines,
the latest guidelines which all
public sector organizations must comply to.
So if some of you, I mean it depends…
I'm sure there's a whole range of people
listening to this talk,
but if you're more technically minded,
you might have already seen
these guidelines.
They are an extensive documentation
and listing of all the
different requirements
for having an accessible website.
I've probably spent some, quite a few hours
bedtime reading for this.
It's not the sort of thing
you can just read off in an hour.
It's certainly something
you need to get your head around
when you're looking at how
accessible websites should be.
In those guidelines I can summarize that
websites need to be perceivable,
operable, understandable and robust.
So that's a lot of criteria
to present to clients
and what I'm looking at,
in terms of report,
is for clients to understand the
importance of having accessible websites
and for that reports being useful to them,
that not only before, but after the report,
they can see which fixes have been done
and which fixes are the most critical
that need to be done
and which are less important, but
still need to be looked at at some point.
In terms of the report going forward
as well, it's a useful tool
for the clients that we have
to create their own accessibility statement
which is a requirement
for this guidelines at the moment,
for certainly in the UK
for the legislation that even if
your website is fully accessible
you still have an accessibility statement.
So in terms of actually
creating an accessibility report,
there's a methodology
which you can look at from w3.org
which gives a good in-depth listing of
all the different criteria to look through
and how to actually
structure your accessibility report.
Now this is alone something
we wouldn't present to our clients
because it is a very detailed
and quite technical presentation
on highlighting what has been tested
and who has tested it
and the types of tests
that have been performed.
So the challenge that
I wanted to get around
was looking at what accessibility
reports do at the moment
and how we can make that more accessible
to not only the people who are going to be
fixing the technical issues in the website,
but the content issues,
the overall readability of the content.
So typically we'll have a lot of
different people looking at the report.
So it's important that we make
that report as accessible as possible
to everybody who is not only reading it,
but actually putting in information
and issues into that report.
Typically there'll be many issues which are
the same over different pages on websites
and the similar solutions
as well to fix those issues.
And also in terms of our own example
where we have many different clients,
we need to have multiple people
editing those reports
or reviewing those reports.
So we needed a solution to allow
different people to look at those reports
at the same time.
We also had quite a short deadline
to create all of these
reports for different clients
so having a facility to make those reports
in the most efficient and accurate way
was very important
and having a way to present
very technical language
in a way which doesn't
completely take over the report
and make it difficult for somebody
who isn't technically minded
to get to the most
important points in the report.
And also a lot of our clients are
just used to having a PDF to print off
whenever they look at documents.
So, although PDFs aren't inherently
that accessible, we still have that option
for the report to be printed off as a PDF
or just as a paper printout.
So creating accessibility report.
We decided to use WordPress because
WordPress is what we use day-to-day
in our company.
We have a whole team of people
who can not only work on the backend,
but develop a front-end user interface,
can customize themes,
and WordPress just generally
has got a great community of people
to make the whole content
management system a lot more robust.
It's important to say we don't
actually use Gutenberg in our reports.
We still use the Classic editor interface,
and that goes back to my—
my intention is to make this report
not only accessible for the front end,
but accessible for people
who are creating reports,
so the whole way of entering
information into reports
is using the standard WordPress
content management system,
without any of the Gutenberg changes.
So starting with how we create the reports,
we use, if anybody is
familiar with WordPress,
on the backend
we use a number of existing plugins,
where we use the Classic Editor
the override, so we don't get the
Gutenberg presentation.
We use Custom Fields—
Advanced Custom Fields—
which gives us a few more options
in terms of adding extra fields to content
and making that more easy
to add repeated content.
So if you've got like a
repeated issue or repeated criteria,
we can just start typing the words
for that criteria
and it will populate field
without us having to go through and repeat
the same thing for every single report.
We use Custom Post Types to
store the solutions and the criteria
as a centralized area of content
so we can refer back
to those pieces of content
and put those into each report,
and that helps make the whole
process a lot more efficient and accurate.
And in terms of presenting
the reports to clients,
we use the standard password protection
on posts when we publish them,
so that only the client with a
password can review that report.
In terms of actually
viewing the reports as a user,
we try and comply to
WCAG 2.1 (AA) standard.
So everything we do is
client compliant to that level.
You can navigate the entire report
using keyboard, screen reader,
and each of the sections are all
accessible through a single navigation.
And supposing I was to say that
the whole report is a single page.
So if you want to print it off you can,
just print off as a PDF if you wish.
And in terms of beyond
the technical standards,
we also look at how readable language is.
So, if we've got a
technical term such as ARIA,
A-R-I-A,
we explain what that abbreviation means
and in terms of the whole
sort of general design system,
we try to apply standards
which are accessible.
So we have gov.uk has their own design
system and we take influence from that.
So things such as the issues which
I'll show you in a short while
in reports are all using standard
components, which are accessibility tested.
So let's look inside
the accessibility report.
Initially the report was a prototype
which I developed without WordPress.
So this report is flexible,
we can use what—
anybody could use the report
in whatever CMS
or even just a static template
if they wanted to.
The current set we have
is a WordPress setup
that is fairly customizable
to however you need it to be.
So we start off with saying
who created the report,
outlining the person.
That was optional if they
want to have their avatar
or any other information
about when the report was done,
what their role is in the organization
and outlining if there was anybody else
who quality checked the report
and the overall compliance of report.
So in some cases we
have clients who stipulate
they want their website
to be up to AAA standard,
so we'll make a differentiation
between websites which have
been checked to AA or AAA.
So in terms of outlining what we tested,
we created a list of say how many pages
or PDFs have been tested
and then outlining how it's being tested,
so we always specify the automated
and manual tests which we've done.
We have different browsers
and different devices we use
and different combinations we use.
Typically that will involve
a few screen readers.
We have a limited team.
You can actually do that
so although we have—
there are several
different screen readers—
we only test with what we have available.
At the moment, we test with
VoiceOver, NVDA,
and the mobile equivalent.
So we've got VoiceOver on iOS
and TalkBack on Android
and Narrator on Windows.
And we'll probably look at having some more
when we maybe expand actually a bit more
in the accessibility side of things.
So this is giving an outline
of just how it's being tested
and that is before any of the issues
or outlining how we fix those issues.
Now the issues identified in report,
we typically have four user impact levels.
So that starts with minor,
moderate, serious and critical.
These are user impact levels
we take from the Axe tool by Deque
and we use that as platform automated tests
to get an overview of what are
the main issues with websites
before moving on to the manual tests.
And so within our report we can
use things such as the accordions
from the gov uk design system
to make the whole collection
of issues more simplified
and more collated.
So if there's an issue,
if it's the same issue on different pages,
it's a lot easier to just
go to that single issue
and outline it within a certain section.
So for each user impact level
we have these accordion items
which as a description of the image
that we have to the right of the slide
is the critical issue's title,
with the issue,
the type of test, so in this
case it's an automated test
and where the issue is located.
So in this case,
we have the home page navigation
and then after that we say
the level that it has been assessed to.
So in this case
the level has been WCAG 2.0, AA
and the specific criteria that
the issue is not complying with,
is 1.4.3 contrast minimum.
So following those details we outline
what is the problem and who it affects.
So in this case we have
multiple instances of contrast
between foreground and background colors.
It doesn't meet the
contrast ratio threshold
and this includes
banners, post dates,
this has a serious user impact because
there are many types of vision impairments
where poor color contrast could
affect their ability to view the website.
Then after that we have
screenshots of where that is present.
Now this also helps for again
people who aren't technically minded
to actually get an idea
of where the problem is.
So in this case we have
four small screenshots
which can be opened
in a light box kind of presentation,
if you want to expand it,
and within that we may
also have code samples.
In this example we don't have
that, but in some we would do.
And finally in the issue
is the recommended solution.
We decided to put the solutions
in a separate section.
So in this case we have a small
summary of what the solution is
and an anchor link
to the solution further down.
So the solutions section is again a
collated list of what the solutions are.
Typically a solution may be
applicable to different issues
and in this case we have an
image again on the right slide
with a few issues of being given solutions.
And in this case we have one about ARIA,
removing ARIA,
one about changing HTML here
because the bottom element isn't used,
and another one for changing the color
contrast because of background color.
So within each of these solutions
we give the outline of the solution,
how to fix it.
In some cases the solution
is aimed at a technical person.
is aimed as a content person.
So in this example,
we don't actually specify that,
but in a future iteration of this
whole platform we're going to do
make a lot clearer on who that
issue, who that solution is aimed at
in terms of responsibility.
And finally we refer again to the criteria
that the solution is applicable to
and again that is another anchor link
to a section further down in the report.
And finally in the report we
have the references section.
This again links you to the
WCAG reference for the criteria.
In each case we also have a secondary link
to an explanation of how to
understand that criteria a bit more.
In both cases the explanation has a
lot more than we can write and report.
And one of the reasons
why I decided not to include
an entire description of the criteria
in the report itself,
again it's just not to make
it so overwhelming for different people
in the report
and to make the report a reasonable level
for everybody using it.
So what have we learned
from creating this platform?
Certainly early on we've found there's
a lot of information to include in a report
and using visual space effectively is
certainly something which you need to
when you've got so much
information to interpret
to a vast range of different people
you might be viewing the report.
We often have different clients
and this is an example,
we have the Office for National Statistics
and in such an example as that,
we may be creating reports to a more
customized level than maybe some others
in terms of the people viewing it,
in terms of what they
need from the reports.
There are ways that we
might consider making it
more customizable
than it is at the moment.
In terms of, again, going back to
who the issues are applicable to,
who's responsible for fixing those issues,
we should maybe look at
making that bit more clearer.
In the discussions we've had with clients,
I've found that often many will
feel that the report is really just for
a technical person to look at
and really they're just
there just to view reports
and summarize that the timing,
actually understand how much time
they need for the fixes to be made.
Whereas in many cases the fixes are
for their own team of content editors
and decision makers to spend time
making lots of fixes themselves
And then also finally looking at
the report in terms of how crucial it is
to making websites more accessible,
it's only a complement to discussion
and ongoing discussion with clients
to understand about how to
make the websites more accessible
and going forward that the report
is only a one-off snapshot in time.
That they need to understand that
making their website accessible
is an ongoing process
which they need to revisit frequently
and not just as a one-off
to meet this legislation.
So what's next for our report platform?
We currently have the platform
in our own private repository.
It's not really in a state where
we could open source it right now.
But we would like to make it open source
as potentially a WordPress plugin
and also just as a static template that
you can work as your own presentation
for any content management system.
It would also be great to get users
to test out the platform,
not only as content editors,
but as users viewing the report
and we'd like to do some
usability testing with people
to really understand what are the problems
are in interpreting that information
and how to make reports more accessible.
And then finally also to make the
whole process a lot more streamlined
we'd like to link those issues
into a tracking integration.
So for example, if you're
using a system such as GitHub
or Trello potentially
having a link with it in that,
so potentially maybe
it's something like an API
so that we could make
that whole information a lot more open
and easier to link to
certain aspects of the report.
And not only developers,
but anybody else who wants to see
the progress of changes being fixed
and any other information basically
is a lot more easily accessible.
So really I'm probably
finishing quite early for this, but
just as a roundup really
I just wanted to say
thank you to everybody
who's organized this event.
And I am happy to take
questions now or later.
The company dxw.com, do a whole range
of work in the public sector.
And if you are based in London,
Leeds, or anywhere within the UK,
we're happy to talk about
how we can work for you
in making not only the
web more accessible
but helping public sector
services and service design.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Calum.
I believe we have a lot of
time for questions.
We can, but we certainly are not seeing
that much questions in the chat.
So I would like to ask you
a personal question.
What would you like to see in the future?
You mentioned about
open source as a plugin,
would you give us a bit
more details about that?
A little bit more in-depth idea about
how the future, accessible future to you.
Sure.
So my background is in mainly,
sort of front end user interface design
and I think making the
whole developer process
a lot more friendly in terms of
the linking of issues to a system
which makes things like
continuous integration,
so developing a way for accessibility
testing in an automated way
a lot more easy to
include in the build process.
And if that can be, I think
mainly in my report context,
but generally the availability
of accessibility testing
in continuous integration and development
make that process look more
well documented and promoted.
That would be great.
Making the web more accessible
I think is something which a lot of the
developers I've spoken to
aren't really aware of enough
and how to make that process
maybe more easier, I think.
Thank you.
So my next question to you is:
based on your experience, where do
you think accessibility is successful more?
Is it total— is it more
leaning towards technology
or to acceptance of the use of technology?
Sorry, if you
could repeat that again, sorry.
Sure. So where do you
think the success lies for accessibility,
overall accessibility?
Is it on the use of more technology
or making it aware for people to
be able to use those technologies?
Is it on awareness or on technology?
How would you prioritize it,
the success of accessibility?
I think certainly both.
Though, there's room for
improvement on the latter point,
I think certainly more
in terms of awareness
and making it more attractive,
taking away some of the barriers to how
we present that accessibility information.
How we make it easier
for developer relations to,
not only just see it as an afterthought,
but something you start doing
as soon as you start
writing one line of code,
you know how you're going to test it
and where there might be
potential problems for different users.
Right. So another question.
These are all coming from me,
so I really appreciate this opportunity
for me to get firsthand
experience of asking the question.
So I want to know, while trying
to explain accessibility to people
who is not totally aware of
such a thing which exists,
would you share some of
your experience of struggling
and trying to find it very difficult
to make someone understand
the importance of having accessibility.
Sure. I think the
perceptions of accessibility
certainly on the web
are very limited from my
experience of speaking to developers
and being able to convince them
that what they're doing is important
and that I think it's something
where they're certainly improving.
And certainly events like this
are helping with that process,
but just a general awareness
is again something which I see lacking
in my experience of speaking to people
and if there's a way of making
that process just a little bit easier
in terms of the testing
process and auditing websites
to understand that, is certainly
some way to go I think.
And there are tools
which are making that progress easier
and the browser tools
which I mentioned, Axe,
and Lighthouse to some extent as well.
They are tools which I've found
have opened up some awareness more
in terms of accessibility.
I'll still say that there's some way to go.
All right, thank you so much.
We did get a question from the chat.
So the question is, how can we
follow process for the code liberation
from your accessibility report plugin?
And there's a form of comment,
I'm sure that WordPress a11y community
could help to translate and contribute.
And also the person
says, thanks for the talk, Calum.
So thank you.
So yeah the report tool is
something which it is
intentioned to make it open source.
The code is all pretty much just
WordPress based templates
and WordPress based plugins.
So things like custom fields
and the presentation itself
is relatively easy just to share
and I'd like to do that
within the next couple of months hopefully.
We are open about doing it
and not just as an internal tool, but
something to help other organizations with.
So certainly,
we'll try and put up on GitHub
for the next few months if we can.
Absolutely!
So thank you so much Calum
for taking the time and
initiative for speaking today
at this event—
24 hour long talking about
accessibility, being part of it.
What other initiatives would
you encourage to stakeholders,
if they could make a change,
they could make a difference,
who would you encourage to step forward
so that accessibility can become
more easily available
for everyone to understand,
accept and apply?
So do you mean
in terms of the organizations?
Yeah, the big ones,
policy makers, government.
Yeah I think certainly credit
to some of the people in the government
who are stepping forward.
Maybe not so much the current government,
but in terms of the people working
on terms as the gov.uk guidelines
and the overall drive to make at least
the government's website more accessible,
that's certainly setting a good standard.
I think in terms of private sector as well,
there's some great
examples of organizations
I'm trying to think of one
now, but potentially Monzo
who are one of the organizations
in creating online banking
if they were possibly more vocal
on what they're doing for accessibility
that's a good example there,
but also some of the more
established private sector organizations
and the banking sector certainly
because so many banks are essential to
making our day-to-day lives um possible
through accessible websites.
So that's certainly somewhere
which would be great to see.
I know Barclays in the UK do a great effort
towards not only accessibility
on their own website,
but talking about it, being more open.
So that's certainly one I'd reference.
Alright, Calum.
with that we wrap up
the Q&A session as well.
Thank you so so much once again
for your support towards the initiative
and we hope to see you again in future
WordPress Accessibility Day celebrations
such as this one.
I would also like to thank everyone
for attending the session
with Calum Ryan and myself.
You can continue the conversation using
the #wpad, #wpad2020 and @wpaccessibility.
Also don't forget to attend the
next talk: "Digital Transformation
or Social Digital Transformation
with Merary Alvarado
at 11 am UTC sharp, here in the same track.
The host for the next few
talks would be Amanda Bailey.
I would like to personally give shout out
to the session manager, Stefano;
our chat monitor, Monique, Hareesh,
and also to Joe Dolson
for being the lead organizer
and putting up such an amazing
team with efficiency and success.
Until the next talk happens,
we want to say goodbye to the viewers
from Calum and myself.
See you right here after the break.
Bye bye.